Basic Usage
===========

We now illustrate the basic capabilities of the ``respy`` package in a simple tutorial.

.. todo::

    The following link refers to the test/resources dir since there is no longer any
    special directory for the tutorial files. Would it be better to separate this files
    in a specific example directory? Additionally there is no longer an example.ini
    initalization file. The link under prerequisites still refers to the master branch,
    sinse there is no example.ini file in janosg.

All the material is available `online
<https://github.com/OpenSourceEconomics/respy/blob/master/respy/clsRespy.py>`_.

Prerequisites
-------------

**Python**

To complete the current tutorial a Pyhon v. 3.4 or newer installation is required.

**Initialization File**

In order to perform simulation and/or estimation using ``respy`` package an
initialization file containing initial parameter values, important data set dimentions,
arguments for the optimization algorythms, etc. needs to be specified. Details on the
components of the initialization file are presented in the section
:ref:`model-specification`. Please note that the initialization file should be in your
current working directory or another accessible directory when executing the commands
and scripts discussed below.

Example
-------
Now we can explore the basic functionalities of the ``respy`` package based on a simple
example.

**Simulation and Estimation**

Execution of the short script below in a python interpreter performs the following:

* calls for the usage of the ``respy`` package,
* defines a model in ``respy``  based on the initialization file,
* simulates a data set of agents' choices and state experienes for the specified number
  of agents and periods based on the parameters values in the initialization file,
* uses the simulated data as an imput data set to estimate requested parameters based on
  starting values specialized in the initialization file,
* simulates a data set for the specified number of agents and periods based on the
  parameters values in the initialization file.


.. code-block:: python

    """Simulates and estimates a model based on an initial specification."""

    # Import the package
    import respy

    # Create example.ini and save directory as working directory
    import os

    os.chdir("your_dir")

    # Initialize an instance of the RespyCls
    import respy

    respy_obj = respy.RespyCls("example.ini")

    # Simulate a sample from the specified model
    respy.simulate(respy_obj)

    # Estimate the model using the simulated data as an observed sample
    x, crit_val = respy.fit(respy_obj)

    # Simulate a semple based on estimated parameters
    respy_obj.update_model_paras(x)
    respy.simulate(respy_obj)

The simulation and estimation functionalities of the ``respy`` package can also be used
seperately. To perform a simulation only an initialization file, as discussed above, is
required. To directly estimate the model parameters your working directory has to
contain the initialization file and your data set. Here we are using the simulated data
for the estimation. However, you can of course also use other data sources. Just make
sure they follow the layout of the simulated sample as visible in ``data.respy.dat``.
For more information on the required structure of the dataset see
:ref:`model-specification`. The coefficient values in the initialization file serve as
the starting values.


**Output Files**

During the script execution, several files will appear in the current working directory.
First, we outline the files generated during the initial simulation.

* **data.respy.sol**

Records the progress of the backward induction procedure. If the interpolation method is
used during the backward induction procedure, the coefficient estimates and goodness of
fit statistics are provided.

* **data.respy.pkl**

This file is an instance of the ``RespyCls`` and contains detailed information about the
solution of model such as the :math:`E\max` of each state for example. For details,
please consult the `source code
<https://github.com/OpenSourceEconomics/respy/blob/master/respy/clsRespy.py>`_ directly.
It is created if persistent storage of results is requested in the *SOLUTION* section of
the initialization file.

* **data.respy.sim**

Allows to monitor the progress of the simulation. It provides information about the seed
used to sample the random components of the agents' state experience and the total
number of simulated agents.

* **data.respy.dat**

Contains the simulated data on agents' choices and state experiences. It has the
following structure:

    =======     ========================
    Column      Information
    =======     ========================
    1           agent identifier
    2           time period
    3           choice (1 = Occupation A, 2 = Occupation B, 3 = education, 4 = home)
    4           wages (missing value if not working)
    5           work experience in Occupation A
    6           work experience in Occupation B
    7           years of schooling
    8           lagged choice
    9           type number (0 for the whole column, if homogenous agents)
    10 - 13     total rewads - all components
    14 - 17     systematic reward - no shock
    18 - 21     shock reward - shock component
    22          discount rate
    23 - 24     general reward - non-monetary rewards and non- common rewards, example
                cm1 cm2 and alpha for occupation A
    25          common reward - indicators assoc with beta 1 and beta 2
    26 - 29     immediate reward - period reward
    =======     ========================

* **data.respy.info**

Provides descriptive statistics such as the choice probabilities, the transition matrix,
number of agents per period and occupation, and the rspctive wage distributions. It also
prints out the underlying parameterization of the model.

Second, we turn to the estimation output. The fit procedure directly returns the value
of the coefficients at the final step of the optimizer, as well as the value of the
criterion function. However, some additional files appear in the meantime.

* **est.respy.info**

Allows to monitor the estimation as it progresses. It provides information about
starting values, step values, and current values as well as the corresponding value of
the criterion function.

* **est.respy.log**

Documents details about the estimation procedure. Provides informaton on the
precondigitoning of the parameters including the original parameter value, the scailing
factor and the rescaled parameter. Further, details about each of the evaluations of the
criterion function are included. Most importantly, once an estimation is completed, it
provides the return message from the optimizer.

Third, additional information is provided in two further generated files:

* **scaling.respy.out**

* **solution.respy.pkl**

Finally, when a second simulation is performed, now based on the parameter estimates,
the existing simulation output files are replaced by new ones referring to the current
simulation run.
